Add alt-da mode docs (#752)
ethereum-optimism/docs: pages/builders/chain-operators/management/alt-da-mode.mdx

description: Learn how to run an Alt-DA mode chain.
---

import { Callout, Steps } from 'nextra/components'

# How to Run an Alt-DA Mode Chain

<Callout type="warning">
The Alt-DA Mode feature is a Beta feature of the MIT licensed OP Stack. Features in beta are built and reviewed by the Optimism Collective’s core contributors, and provide developers with early access to highly requested configurations. These features may experience stability issues, and we encourage feedback from our early users.
</Callout>

This guide provides a walkthrough for chain operators who want to run an Alt-DA Mode chain. See the [Alt-DA Mode Explainer](/stack/protocol/features/alt-de-mode) for a general overview of this OP Stack configuration.
An Alt-DA Mode OP Stack chain enables a chain operator to post and read data to any alternative data availability layer that has built a functioning OP Stack DA Server.

<Steps>

### Compatible op-node & op-* Versions

You should use at least the following versions when running your chain.

- op-node/v1.8.0-rc.1
- op-proposer/v1.8.0-rc.1
- op-batcher/v1.8.0-rc.1
- [Latest version of op-geth](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/op-geth/releases/latest)

> For deploying your contracts, use the latest release - if you are trying to launch an Alt-DA Mode Chain using a custom gas token, follow the contract deployment instructions in our [Custom Gas Token docs](/builders/chain-operators/management/custom-gas-token.mdx)

Reviewer: Nittiest nit: missing period.

### Step 1: Set up your DA Server

<Callout type="warning">
DA Servers are not built or maintained by Optimism Collective Core Contributors. They are often maintained by the team that built the DA Layer that the DA Server enables access to. Please reach out to the team who built the DA Server you are trying to run with any questions or issues.
</Callout>

> - Celestia’s docs on how to run the Celestia DA server:

Reviewer: I noticed there are several references to Plasma:

1) In the URLs for both Celestia and EigenLayer
2) Celestia's README is in a repo called "op-plasma-celestia"
3) Avail's document tree shows "Avail-Powered OP Stack Plasma Optimium" as does the breadcrumb

Author: Will track these down and update them post launch +1

          HTTP address of a DA Server
   
    --altda.enabled                    (default: false)                   ($OP_NODE_ALTDA_ENABLED)
          Enable Alt-DA mode
   
    --altda.verify-on-read             (default: true)                    ($OP_NODE_ALTDA_VERIFY_ON_READ)
          Verify input data matches the commitments from the DA storage service

```

### Step 3: Configuring your Batcher

```
    --altda.da-server value                                               ($OP_BATCHER_ALTDA_DA_SERVER)
          HTTP address of a DA Server
   
    --altda.da-service                 (default: false)                   ($OP_BATCHER_ALTDA_DA_SERVICE)
          Use DA service type where commitments are generated by the DA server
   
    --altda.enabled                    (default: false)                   ($OP_BATCHER_ALTDA_ENABLED)
          Enable Alt-DA mode
   
    --altda.verify-on-read             (default: true)                    ($OP_BATCHER_ALTDA_VERIFY_ON_READ)
          Verify input data matches the commitments from the DA storage service
```

- Provide `--altda.enabled=true, --atlda.da-server=$DA_SERVER_HTTP_URL --altda.da-service=true`

> After completing steps 1-3 above, you will have an Alt-DA mode chain up and running.

Reviewer: 1) @axelKingsley is there a specific order in which these components need to be started?
2) Perhaps we can also add here the specific logs or other info to look for to determine that these were successfully set up.
3) Are there common errors / failure modes we want to call out and specific steps that can be taken to resolve them?

Author: Let's check in on these in a new PR

### Step 4: Setting Your Fee Configuration

> - Chain operators are not posting everything to Ethereum, just commitments, so chain operators will need to determine fee scalars values to charge users. The fee scalar values are network throughput dependent, so values will need to be adjusted by chain operators as needed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Alt-DA submits only Commitments to data to L1, which is considerably smaller than the raw Inputs, so chain operators will need to determine fee scalars values to charge users. The fee scalar values are network throughput dependent, so values will need to be adjusted by chain operators as needed.
```

Or something?

- Set scalar values inside the deploy config. The example below shows some possible fee scalar values, assuming negligible DA Layer costs, but will need to be adjusted up or down based on network throughput.
    
    ```
    // Set in Deploy Config

>       "gasPriceOracleBaseFeeScalar": 7663, // Approximate commitment tx base cost

Reviewer: Is there a default scalar value we can recommend starting with (and is the 7663 noted here recommended or just for illustration)?

Author: this is what lattice was using, I think its a safe starting estimate

      "gasPriceOracleBlobBaseFeeScalar": 0, // blobs are off for now
    ```
    

> - Cost structure for Alt-DA Mode: The transaction data is split up into 128kb chunks and the submitted to your DA Layer. Then, 32 byte commitments are submitted (goes to batch inbox address) to L1 for each 128kb chunk. Then, figure out how much that costs relative to the amount of transactions your chain is putting through.

Reviewer: Nit: Consider reordering these bullet points and moving this one up to be just after the first one that also talks about determining the appropriate scalar values.

<aside>

> NOTE: Some initial scalar values must be set early on in the deploy config in Step 2. And then at a later point, chain operators can update the scalar values with an L1 transaction.

Reviewer 2: Assuming we have such a document, may be worth linking to the typical "how to adjust scalars" guide from here.
